libc/config/windows/README.md, before:

# Building and Testing LLVM libc on Windows

## Setting Up Environment

To build LLVM libc on Windows, first build Clang using the following steps.

1. Open Command Prompt in Windows
2. Set TEMP and TMP to a directory. Creating this path is necessary for a
   successful clang build.
    1. Create tmp under your preferred directory or under `C:\src`:

        ```
        cd C:\src
        mkdir tmp
        ```

    2. In the start menu, search for "environment variables for your account".
       Set TEMP and TMP to `C:\src\tmp` or the corresponding path elsewhere.
3. Download [Visual Studio Community](https://visualstudio.microsoft.com/downloads/).
4. Install [CMake](https://cmake.org/download/) and
   [Ninja](https://github.com/ninja-build/ninja/releases). (Optional, included
   in Visual Studio).
5. Load the Visual Studio environment variables using this command. This is
   crucial as it allows you to use build tools like CMake and Ninja:

    ```
    "C:\Program Files (x86)\Microsoft Visual Studio\2019\Community\VC\Auxiliary\Build\vcvarsall.bat" amd64
    ```

    Note: **Rerun this command every time you open a new Command Prompt
    window.**

6. If you have not used Git before, install
   [Git](https://git-scm.com/download/win) for Windows. Check out the LLVM
   source tree from Github using:

    ```
    git clone https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project.git
    ```

7. Ensure you have access to Clang, either by downloading from
   [LLVM Download](https://releases.llvm.org/download.html) or
   [building it yourself](https://clang.llvm.org/get_started.html).

## Building LLVM libc

In this section, Clang will be used to compile LLVM
libc, and finally, build and test the libc.

8. Create a empty build directory in `C:\src` or your preferred directory and
    cd to it using:

    ```
    mkdir libc-build
    cd libc-build
    ```

9. Run the following CMake command to generate build files. LLVM libc must be built
   by Clang, so ensure Clang is specified as the C and C++ compiler.

    ```
    cmake -G Ninja ../llvm-project/llvm -DCMAKE_C_COMPILER=C:/src/clang-build/bin/clang-cl.exe -DCMAKE_CXX_COMPILER=C:/src/clang-build/bin/clang-cl.exe  -DLLVM_TARGETS_TO_BUILD=X86 -DLLVM_FORCE_BUILD_RUNTIME=libc -DLLVM_ENABLE_PROJECTS=libc -DLLVM_NATIVE_ARCH=x86_64 -DLLVM_HOST_TRIPLE=x86_64-window-x86-gnu
    ```

10. Build LLVM libc using:

    ```
    ninja llvmlibc

    ```

11. Run tests using:

    ```
    ninja checklibc
    ```

Commit message:

[libc] Enable MPFR library for math functions test
Included more math functions to Windows's entrypoints
and made a cmake option (-DLLVM_LIBC_MPFR_INSTALL_PATH)
where the user can specify the install path where the MPFR
library was built so it can be linked. The try_compile was
moved to LLVMLibCCheckMPFR.cmake, so the variable that is
set after this process can retain its value in other files
of the same parent file. A direct reason for this is for
LIBC_TESTS_CAN_USE_MPFR to be true when the user specifies
MPFR's path and retain its value even after leaving the file.

Reviewed By: sivachandra

Differential Revision: https://reviews.llvm.org/D106894

libc/config/windows/README.md, after:

# Building and Testing LLVM libc on Windows

## Setting Up Environment

To build LLVM libc on Windows, first build Clang using the following steps.

1. Open Command Prompt in Windows
2. Set TEMP and TMP to a directory. Creating this path is necessary for a
   successful clang build.
    1. Create tmp under your preferred directory or under `C:\src`:

        ```
        cd C:\src
        mkdir tmp
        ```

    2. In the start menu, search for "environment variables for your account".
       Set TEMP and TMP to `C:\src\tmp` or the corresponding path elsewhere.
3. Download [Visual Studio Community](https://visualstudio.microsoft.com/downloads/).
4. Install [CMake](https://cmake.org/download/) and
   [Ninja](https://github.com/ninja-build/ninja/releases). (Optional, included
   in Visual Studio).
5. Load the Visual Studio environment variables using this command. This is
   crucial as it allows you to use build tools like CMake and Ninja:

    ```
    "C:\Program Files (x86)\Microsoft Visual Studio\2019\Community\VC\Auxiliary\Build\vcvarsall.bat" amd64
    ```

    Note: **Rerun this command every time you open a new Command Prompt
    window.**

6. If you have not used Git before, install
   [Git](https://git-scm.com/download/win) for Windows. Check out the LLVM
   source tree from Github using:

    ```
    git clone https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project.git
    ```

7. Ensure you have access to Clang, either by downloading from
   [LLVM Download](https://releases.llvm.org/download.html) or
   [building it yourself](https://clang.llvm.org/get_started.html).

## Building LLVM libc

In this section, Clang will be used to compile LLVM
libc, and finally, build and test the libc.

8. Create a empty build directory in `C:\src` or your preferred directory and
    cd to it using:

    ```
    mkdir libc-build
    cd libc-build
    ```

9. Run the following CMake command to generate build files. LLVM libc must be built
   by Clang, so ensure Clang is specified as the C and C++ compiler.

    ```
    cmake -G Ninja ../llvm-project/llvm -DCMAKE_C_COMPILER=C:/src/clang-build/bin/clang-cl.exe -DCMAKE_CXX_COMPILER=C:/src/clang-build/bin/clang-cl.exe  -DLLVM_TARGETS_TO_BUILD=X86 -DLLVM_FORCE_BUILD_RUNTIME=libc -DLLVM_ENABLE_PROJECTS=libc -DLLVM_NATIVE_ARCH=x86_64 -DLLVM_HOST_TRIPLE=x86_64-window-x86-gnu
    ```

    Some LLVM libc math unittests test correctness/accuracy against results from
    the [GNU MPFR library](https://www.mpfr.org/). If you want to run math tests
    which use MPFR, and if MPFR on your machine is not installed in the default
    include and linker lookup directories, then you can specify the MPFR install
    directory by passing an additional CMake option as follows:

    -DLLVM_LIBC_MPFR_INSTALL_PATH=<path/mpfr/install/dir>

    If the above option is specified, then `${LLVM_LIBC_MPFR_INSTALL_PATH}/include`
    will be added to the include directories, and
    `${LLVM_LIBC_MPFR_INSTALL_PATH}/lib` will be added to the linker lookup
    directories.

    NOTE: The GNU MPFR library depends on the
    [GNU GMP library](https://gmplib.org/). If you specify the above option, then it
    will be assumed that GMP is also installed in the same directory or availabe in
    the default paths.

10. Build LLVM libc using:

    ```
    ninja llvmlibc

    ```

11. Run tests using:

    ```
    ninja checklibc
    ```
