flang/docs/FlangDriver.md, before:

<!--===- docs/FlangDriver.md

   Part of the LLVM Project, under the Apache License v2.0 with LLVM Exceptions.
   See https://llvm.org/LICENSE.txt for license information.
   SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0 WITH LLVM-exception

-->

# Flang drivers

```eval_rst
.. contents::
   :local:
```

There are two main drivers in Flang:
* the compiler driver, `flang-new`
* the frontend driver, `flang-new -fc1`

The compiler driver will allow you to control all compilation phases (i.e.
preprocessing, frontend code-generation, middlend/backend code-optimisation and
lowering, linking). For frontend specific tasks, the compiler driver creates a
Fortran compilation job and delegates it to `flang-new -fc1`, the frontend driver.

The frontend driver glues all of the frontend libraries together and provides
an easy-to-use and intuitive interface to the frontend. It accepts many
frontend-specific options not available in `flang-new` and as such it provides a
finer control over the frontend. Similarly to `-Xclang` in `clang`, you can use
`-Xflang` to forward the frontend specific flags from the compiler directly to
the frontend driver.

## Compiler Driver

The main entry point for Flang's compiler driver is implemented in
`flang/tools/flang-driver/driver.cpp`.  Flang's compiler driver is implemented
in terms of Clang's driver library, `clangDriver`. This approach allows us to:
* benefit from Clang's support for various targets, platforms and operating systems
* leverage Clang's ability to drive various backends available in LLVM, as well
  as linkers and assemblers.
One implication of this dependency on Clang is that all of Flang's compiler
options are defined alongside Clang's options in
`clang/include/clang/Driver/Options.td`. For options that are common for both
Flang and Clang, the corresponding definitions are shared.

Internally, a `clangDriver` based compiler driver works by creating actions
that correspond to various compilation phases, e.g. `PreprocessJobClass`,
`CompileJobClass`, `BackendJobClass` or `LinkJobClass` from the
`clang::driver::Action::ActionClass` enum. There are also other, more
specialised actions, e.g. `MigrateJobClass` or `InputClass`, that do not map
directly to common compilation steps. The actions to run are determined from
the supplied compiler flags, e.g.

* `-E` for `PreprocessJobClass`,
* `-c` for `CompileJobClass`.

In most cases, the driver creates a chain of actions/jobs/phases where the
output from one action is the input for the subsequent one. You can use the
`-ccc-print-phases` flag to see the sequence of actions that the driver will
create for your compiler invocation:
```bash
flang-new -ccc-print-phases -E file.f
+- 0: input, "file.f", f95-cpp-input
1: preprocessor, {0}, f95
```
As you can see, for `-E` the driver creates only two jobs and stops immediately
after preprocessing. The first job simply prepares the input. For `-c`, the
pipeline of the created jobs is more complex:
```bash
flang-new -ccc-print-phases -c file.f
         +- 0: input, "file.f", f95-cpp-input
      +- 1: preprocessor, {0}, f95
   +- 2: compiler, {1}, ir
+- 3: backend, {2}, assembler
4: assembler, {3}, object
```
Note that currently Flang does not support code-generation and `flang-new` will
fail during the second step above with the following error:
```bash
error: code-generation is not available yet
```
The other phases are printed nonetheless when using `-ccc-print-phases`, as
that reflects what `clangDriver`, the library, will try to create and run.

For actions specific to the frontend (e.g. preprocessing or code generation), a
command to call the frontend driver is generated (more specifically, an
instance of `clang::driver::Command`). Every command is bound to an instance of
`clang::driver::Tool`. For Flang we introduced a specialisation of this class:
`clang::driver::Flang`. This class implements the logic to either translate or
forward compiler options to the frontend driver, `flang-new -fc1`.

You can read more on the design of `clangDriver` in Clang's [Driver Design &
Internals](https://clang.llvm.org/docs/DriverInternals.html).

## Frontend Driver
Flang's frontend driver is the main interface between end-users and the Flang
frontend. The high-level design is similar to Clang's frontend driver, `clang
-cc1` and consists of the following classes:
* `CompilerInstance`, which is a helper class that encapsulates and manages
  various objects that are always required by the frontend (e.g. `AllSources`,
  `AllCookedSources, `Parsing`, `CompilerInvocation`, etc.). In most cases
  `CompilerInstance` owns these objects, but it also can share them with its
  clients when required. It also implements utility methods to construct and
  manipulate them.
* `CompilerInvocation` encapsulates the configuration of the current
  invocation of the compiler as derived from the command-line options and the
  input files (in particular, file extensions). Among other things, it holds an
  instance of `FrontendOptions`. Like `CompilerInstance`, it owns the objects
  that it manages. It can share them with its clients that want to access them
  even after the corresponding `CompilerInvocation` has been destructed.
* `FrontendOptions` holds options that control the behaviour of the frontend,
  as well as e.g. the list of the input files. These options come either
  directly from the users (through command-line flags) or are derived from
  e.g. the host system configuration.
* `FrontendAction` and `FrontendActions` (the former being the base class for
  the latter) implement the actual actions to perform by the frontend. Usually
  there is one specialisation of `FrontendActions` for every compiler action flag
  (e.g. `-E`, `-fdebug-unparse`). These classes also contain various hooks that
  allow you to e.g. fine-tune the configuration of the frontend based on the
  input.

This list is not exhaustive and only covers the main classes that implement the
driver. The main entry point for the frontend driver, `fc1_main`, is
implemented in `flang/tools/flang-driver/driver.cpp`. It can be accessed by
invoking the compiler driver, `flang-new`, with the `-fc1` flag.

The frontend driver will only run one action at a time. If you specify multiple
action flags, only the last one will be taken into account. The default action
is `ParseSyntaxOnlyAction`, which corresponds to `-fsyntax-only`. In other
words, `flang-new -fc1 <input-file>` is equivalent to `flang-new -fc1 -fsyntax-only
<input-file>`.

## Adding new Compiler Options
Adding a new compiler option in Flang consists of two steps:
* define the new option in a dedicated TableGen file,
* parse and implement the option in the relevant drivers that support it.

### Option Definition
All of Flang's compiler and frontend driver options are defined in
`clang/include/clang/Driver/Options.td` in Clang. When adding a new option to
Flang, you will either:
  * extend the existing definition for an option that is already available
    in one of Clang's drivers (e.g.  `clang`), but not yet available in Flang, or
  * add a completely new definition if the option that you are adding has not
    been defined yet.

There are many predefined TableGen classes and records that you can use to fine
tune your new option. The list of available configurations can be overwhelming
at times. Sometimes the easiest approach is to find an existing option that has
similar semantics to your new option and start by copying that.

For every new option, you will also have to define the visibility of the new
option. This is controlled through the `Flags` field. You can use the following
Flang specific option flags to control this:
  * `FlangOption` - this option will be available in the `flang-new` compiler driver,
  * `FC1Option` - this option will be available in the `flang-new -fc1` frontend driver,
  * `FlangOnlyOption` - this option will not be visible in Clang drivers.

Please make sure that options that you add are only visible in drivers that can
support it. For example, options that only make sense for Fortran input files
(e.g. `-ffree-form`) should not be visible in Clang and be marked as
`FlangOnlyOption`.

When deciding what `OptionGroup` to use when defining a new option in the
`Options.td` file, many new options fall into one of the following two
categories:
  * `Action_Group` - options that define an action to run (e.g.
    `-fsyntax-only`, `-E`)
  * `f_Group` - target independent compiler flags (e.g. `-ffixed-form`,
    `-fopenmp`)
There are also other groups and occasionally you will use them instead of the
groups listed above.

### Option Implementation
First, every option needs to be parsed. Flang compiler options are parsed in
two different places, depending on which driver they belong to:

* frontend driver: `flang/lib/Frontend/CompilerInvocation.cpp`,
* compiler driver: `clang/lib/Driver/ToolChains/Flang.cpp`.

The parsing will depend on the semantics encoded in the TableGen definition.

When adding a compiler driver option (i.e. an option that contains
`FlangOption` among its `Flags`) that you also intend to be understood by the
frontend, make sure that it is either forwarded to `flang-new -fc1` or translated
into some other option that is accepted by the frontend driver. In the case of
options that contain both `FlangOption` and `FC1Option` among its flags, we
usually just forward from `flang-new` to `flang-new -fc1`. This is then tested in
`flang/test/Driver/frontend-forward.F90`.

What follows is usually very dependant on the meaning of the corresponding
option. In general, regular compiler flags (e.g. `-ffree-form`) are mapped to
some state within the driver. A lot of this state is stored within an instance
of `FrontendOptions`, but there are other more specialised classes too. Action
flags (e.g. `-fsyntax-only`) are usually more complex overall, but also more
structured in terms of the implementation.

### Action Options
For options that correspond to an action (i.e. marked as `Action_Group`), you
will have to define a dedicated instance of `FrontendActions` in
`flang/include/flang/Frontend/FrontendOptions.h`. For example, for
`-fsyntax-only` we defined:
```cpp
class ParseSyntaxOnlyAction : public PrescanAndSemaAction {
  void ExecuteAction() override;
};
```
Command line options are mapped to frontend actions through the
`Fortran::frontend::ActionKind` enum.  For every new action option that you
add, you will have to add a dedicated entry in that enum (e.g.
`ParseSyntaxOnly` for `-fsyntax-only`) and a corresponding `case` in
`ParseFrontendArgs` function in the `CompilerInvocation.cpp` file, e.g.:
```cpp
    case clang::driver::options::OPT_fsyntax_only:
      opts.programAction = ParseSyntaxOnly;
      break;
```
Note that this simply sets the program/frontend action within the frontend
driver. You still have make sure that the corresponding frontend action class
is instantiated when your new action option is used. The relevant `switch`
statement is implemented in `Fortran::frontend::CreatedFrontendBaseAction` in
the `ExecuteCompilerInvocation.cpp` file. Here's an example for
`-fsyntax-only`:
```cpp
  case ParseSyntaxOnly:
    return std::make_unique<ParseSyntaxOnlyAction>();
```
At this point you should be able to trigger that frontend action that you have
just added using your new frontend option.

# Testing
In LIT, we define two variables that you can use to invoke Flang's drivers:
* `%flang` is expanded as `flang-new` (i.e. the compiler driver)
* `%flang_fc1` is expanded as `flang-new -fc1` (i.e. the frontend driver)

For most regression tests for the frontend, you will want to use `%flang_fc1`.
In some cases, the observable behaviour will be identical regardless of whether
`%flang` or `%flang_fc1` is used. However, when you are using `%flang` instead
of `%flang_fc1`, the compiler driver will add extra flags to the frontend
driver invocation (i.e. `flang-new -fc1 -<extra-flags>`). In some cases that might
be exactly what you want to test.  In fact, you can check these additional
flags by using the `-###` compiler driver command line option.

Lastly, you can use `! REQUIRES: <feature>` for tests that will only work when
`<feature>` is available. For example, you can use`! REQUIRES: shell` to mark a
test as only available on Unix-like systems (i.e. systems that contain a Unix
shell). In practice this means that the corresponding test is skipped on
Windows.

Commit message:

[flang][docs] Document the `flang` wrapper script
Differential Revision: https://reviews.llvm.org/D107543

flang/docs/FlangDriver.md, after:

<!--===- docs/FlangDriver.md

   Part of the LLVM Project, under the Apache License v2.0 with LLVM Exceptions.
   See https://llvm.org/LICENSE.txt for license information.
   SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0 WITH LLVM-exception

-->

# Flang drivers

```eval_rst
.. contents::
   :local:
```

There are two main drivers in Flang:
* the compiler driver, `flang-new`
* the frontend driver, `flang-new -fc1`

The compiler driver will allow you to control all compilation phases (i.e.
preprocessing, frontend code-generation, middlend/backend code-optimisation and
lowering, linking). For frontend specific tasks, the compiler driver creates a
Fortran compilation job and delegates it to `flang-new -fc1`, the frontend driver.

The frontend driver glues all of the frontend libraries together and provides
an easy-to-use and intuitive interface to the frontend. It accepts many
frontend-specific options not available in `flang-new` and as such it provides a
finer control over the frontend. Similarly to `-Xclang` in `clang`, you can use
`-Xflang` to forward the frontend specific flags from the compiler directly to
the frontend driver.

## Compiler Driver

The main entry point for Flang's compiler driver is implemented in
`flang/tools/flang-driver/driver.cpp`.  Flang's compiler driver is implemented
in terms of Clang's driver library, `clangDriver`. This approach allows us to:
* benefit from Clang's support for various targets, platforms and operating systems
* leverage Clang's ability to drive various backends available in LLVM, as well
  as linkers and assemblers.
One implication of this dependency on Clang is that all of Flang's compiler
options are defined alongside Clang's options in
`clang/include/clang/Driver/Options.td`. For options that are common for both
Flang and Clang, the corresponding definitions are shared.

Internally, a `clangDriver` based compiler driver works by creating actions
that correspond to various compilation phases, e.g. `PreprocessJobClass`,
`CompileJobClass`, `BackendJobClass` or `LinkJobClass` from the
`clang::driver::Action::ActionClass` enum. There are also other, more
specialised actions, e.g. `MigrateJobClass` or `InputClass`, that do not map
directly to common compilation steps. The actions to run are determined from
the supplied compiler flags, e.g.

* `-E` for `PreprocessJobClass`,
* `-c` for `CompileJobClass`.

In most cases, the driver creates a chain of actions/jobs/phases where the
output from one action is the input for the subsequent one. You can use the
`-ccc-print-phases` flag to see the sequence of actions that the driver will
create for your compiler invocation:
```bash
flang-new -ccc-print-phases -E file.f
+- 0: input, "file.f", f95-cpp-input
1: preprocessor, {0}, f95
```
As you can see, for `-E` the driver creates only two jobs and stops immediately
after preprocessing. The first job simply prepares the input. For `-c`, the
pipeline of the created jobs is more complex:
```bash
flang-new -ccc-print-phases -c file.f
         +- 0: input, "file.f", f95-cpp-input
      +- 1: preprocessor, {0}, f95
   +- 2: compiler, {1}, ir
+- 3: backend, {2}, assembler
4: assembler, {3}, object
```
Note that currently Flang does not support code-generation and `flang-new` will
fail during the second step above with the following error:
```bash
error: code-generation is not available yet
```
The other phases are printed nonetheless when using `-ccc-print-phases`, as
that reflects what `clangDriver`, the library, will try to create and run.

For actions specific to the frontend (e.g. preprocessing or code generation), a
command to call the frontend driver is generated (more specifically, an
instance of `clang::driver::Command`). Every command is bound to an instance of
`clang::driver::Tool`. For Flang we introduced a specialisation of this class:
`clang::driver::Flang`. This class implements the logic to either translate or
forward compiler options to the frontend driver, `flang-new -fc1`.

You can read more on the design of `clangDriver` in Clang's [Driver Design &
Internals](https://clang.llvm.org/docs/DriverInternals.html).

## Frontend Driver
Flang's frontend driver is the main interface between end-users and the Flang
frontend. The high-level design is similar to Clang's frontend driver, `clang
-cc1` and consists of the following classes:
* `CompilerInstance`, which is a helper class that encapsulates and manages
  various objects that are always required by the frontend (e.g. `AllSources`,
  `AllCookedSources, `Parsing`, `CompilerInvocation`, etc.). In most cases
  `CompilerInstance` owns these objects, but it also can share them with its
  clients when required. It also implements utility methods to construct and
  manipulate them.
* `CompilerInvocation` encapsulates the configuration of the current
  invocation of the compiler as derived from the command-line options and the
  input files (in particular, file extensions). Among other things, it holds an
  instance of `FrontendOptions`. Like `CompilerInstance`, it owns the objects
  that it manages. It can share them with its clients that want to access them
  even after the corresponding `CompilerInvocation` has been destructed.
* `FrontendOptions` holds options that control the behaviour of the frontend,
  as well as e.g. the list of the input files. These options come either
  directly from the users (through command-line flags) or are derived from
  e.g. the host system configuration.
* `FrontendAction` and `FrontendActions` (the former being the base class for
  the latter) implement the actual actions to perform by the frontend. Usually
  there is one specialisation of `FrontendActions` for every compiler action flag
  (e.g. `-E`, `-fdebug-unparse`). These classes also contain various hooks that
  allow you to e.g. fine-tune the configuration of the frontend based on the
  input.

This list is not exhaustive and only covers the main classes that implement the
driver. The main entry point for the frontend driver, `fc1_main`, is
implemented in `flang/tools/flang-driver/driver.cpp`. It can be accessed by
invoking the compiler driver, `flang-new`, with the `-fc1` flag.

The frontend driver will only run one action at a time. If you specify multiple
action flags, only the last one will be taken into account. The default action
is `ParseSyntaxOnlyAction`, which corresponds to `-fsyntax-only`. In other
words, `flang-new -fc1 <input-file>` is equivalent to `flang-new -fc1 -fsyntax-only
<input-file>`.

## The `flang` script
The `flang` wrapper script for `flang-new` was introduced as a development tool
and to facilitate testing. While code-generation is not available in Flang, you
can use it as a drop-in replacement for other Fortran compilers in your build
scripts.

The `flang` wrapper script will:
* use `flang-new` to unparse the input source file (i.e. it will run `flang-new
  -fc1 -fdebug-unparse <input-file>`), and then
* call a host Fortran compiler, e.g. `gfortran`, to compile the unparsed file.

Here's a basic breakdown of what happens inside `flang` when you run `flang
file.f90`:
```bash
flang-new -fc1 -fdebug-unparse file.f90 -o file-unparsed.f90
gfortran file-unparsed.f90
```
This is a simplified version for illustration purposes only. In practice,
`flang` adds a few more frontend options and it also supports various other use
cases (e.g. compiling C files, linking existing object files). `gfortran` is
the default host compiler used by `flang`. You can change it by setting the
`FLANG_FC` environment variable.

Our intention is to replace `flang` with `flang-new`. Please consider `flang`
as a temporary substitute for Flang's compiler driver while the actual driver
is in development.

## Adding new Compiler Options
Adding a new compiler option in Flang consists of two steps:
* define the new option in a dedicated TableGen file,
* parse and implement the option in the relevant drivers that support it.

### Option Definition
All of Flang's compiler and frontend driver options are defined in
`clang/include/clang/Driver/Options.td` in Clang. When adding a new option to
Flang, you will either:
  * extend the existing definition for an option that is already available
    in one of Clang's drivers (e.g.  `clang`), but not yet available in Flang, or
  * add a completely new definition if the option that you are adding has not
    been defined yet.

There are many predefined TableGen classes and records that you can use to fine
tune your new option. The list of available configurations can be overwhelming
at times. Sometimes the easiest approach is to find an existing option that has
similar semantics to your new option and start by copying that.

For every new option, you will also have to define the visibility of the new
option. This is controlled through the `Flags` field. You can use the following
Flang specific option flags to control this:
  * `FlangOption` - this option will be available in the `flang-new` compiler driver,
  * `FC1Option` - this option will be available in the `flang-new -fc1` frontend driver,
  * `FlangOnlyOption` - this option will not be visible in Clang drivers.

Please make sure that options that you add are only visible in drivers that can
support it. For example, options that only make sense for Fortran input files
(e.g. `-ffree-form`) should not be visible in Clang and be marked as
`FlangOnlyOption`.

When deciding what `OptionGroup` to use when defining a new option in the
`Options.td` file, many new options fall into one of the following two
categories:
  * `Action_Group` - options that define an action to run (e.g.
    `-fsyntax-only`, `-E`)
  * `f_Group` - target independent compiler flags (e.g. `-ffixed-form`,
    `-fopenmp`)
There are also other groups and occasionally you will use them instead of the
groups listed above.

### Option Implementation
First, every option needs to be parsed. Flang compiler options are parsed in
two different places, depending on which driver they belong to:

* frontend driver: `flang/lib/Frontend/CompilerInvocation.cpp`,
* compiler driver: `clang/lib/Driver/ToolChains/Flang.cpp`.

The parsing will depend on the semantics encoded in the TableGen definition.

When adding a compiler driver option (i.e. an option that contains
`FlangOption` among its `Flags`) that you also intend to be understood by the
frontend, make sure that it is either forwarded to `flang-new -fc1` or translated
into some other option that is accepted by the frontend driver. In the case of
options that contain both `FlangOption` and `FC1Option` among its flags, we
usually just forward from `flang-new` to `flang-new -fc1`. This is then tested in
`flang/test/Driver/frontend-forward.F90`.

What follows is usually very dependant on the meaning of the corresponding
option. In general, regular compiler flags (e.g. `-ffree-form`) are mapped to
some state within the driver. A lot of this state is stored within an instance
of `FrontendOptions`, but there are other more specialised classes too. Action
flags (e.g. `-fsyntax-only`) are usually more complex overall, but also more
structured in terms of the implementation.

### Action Options
For options that correspond to an action (i.e. marked as `Action_Group`), you
will have to define a dedicated instance of `FrontendActions` in
`flang/include/flang/Frontend/FrontendOptions.h`. For example, for
`-fsyntax-only` we defined:
```cpp
class ParseSyntaxOnlyAction : public PrescanAndSemaAction {
  void ExecuteAction() override;
};
```
Command line options are mapped to frontend actions through the
`Fortran::frontend::ActionKind` enum.  For every new action option that you
add, you will have to add a dedicated entry in that enum (e.g.
`ParseSyntaxOnly` for `-fsyntax-only`) and a corresponding `case` in
`ParseFrontendArgs` function in the `CompilerInvocation.cpp` file, e.g.:
```cpp
    case clang::driver::options::OPT_fsyntax_only:
      opts.programAction = ParseSyntaxOnly;
      break;
```
Note that this simply sets the program/frontend action within the frontend
driver. You still have make sure that the corresponding frontend action class
is instantiated when your new action option is used. The relevant `switch`
statement is implemented in `Fortran::frontend::CreatedFrontendBaseAction` in
the `ExecuteCompilerInvocation.cpp` file. Here's an example for
`-fsyntax-only`:
```cpp
  case ParseSyntaxOnly:
    return std::make_unique<ParseSyntaxOnlyAction>();
```
At this point you should be able to trigger that frontend action that you have
just added using your new frontend option.

# Testing
In LIT, we define two variables that you can use to invoke Flang's drivers:
* `%flang` is expanded as `flang-new` (i.e. the compiler driver)
* `%flang_fc1` is expanded as `flang-new -fc1` (i.e. the frontend driver)

For most regression tests for the frontend, you will want to use `%flang_fc1`.
In some cases, the observable behaviour will be identical regardless of whether
`%flang` or `%flang_fc1` is used. However, when you are using `%flang` instead
of `%flang_fc1`, the compiler driver will add extra flags to the frontend
driver invocation (i.e. `flang-new -fc1 -<extra-flags>`). In some cases that might
be exactly what you want to test.  In fact, you can check these additional
flags by using the `-###` compiler driver command line option.

Lastly, you can use `! REQUIRES: <feature>` for tests that will only work when
`<feature>` is available. For example, you can use`! REQUIRES: shell` to mark a
test as only available on Unix-like systems (i.e. systems that contain a Unix
shell). In practice this means that the corresponding test is skipped on
Windows.
